[SYCL][Doc] Fill address spaces handling section in design documentation (#3027)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md

// GPU/accelerator implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {
  // GetAnnotatedPointer<T, global>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"
  // See sycl/include/CL/sycl/access/access.hpp for more details
  using pointer_t = typename GetAnnotatedPointer<T, AS>::type *;
 
  pointer_t data;
  public:
  pointer_t get_pointer() { return data; }
}
#else
// CPU/host implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {
  T *data; // regular unannotated pointer
  public:
  T *get_pointer() { return data; }
}
#endif
```

Depending on the compiler mode `multi_ptr` will either annotate internal data
with address space attribute or not.

To utilize existing clang's functionality, we re-use following OpenCL address
space attributes in SYCL mode: `__attribute__((opencl_global))`,
`__attribute__((opencl_global_host))`, `__attribute__((opencl_global_device))`,
`__attribute__((opencl_local))`, `__attribute__((opencl_private))` and
`__attribute__((opencl_constant))`.

The main address space semantic difference of SYCL mode from OpenCL is that
SYCL doesn't assign OpenCL generic address space to a declaration w/o explicit

> address space attribute. Similar to other single-source C++-based GPU
> programming modes like OpenMP/CUDA/HIP, SYCL keeps "default" address space for
> such declarations and defines pointer casts between OpenCL address space
> attributes and default address space the same way OpenCL specification defines
> them for generic address space. This design has two important features: keeps
> the type system consistent between host and device compilers on the one hand and
> enable tools for emitting device code aligned with SPIR memory model (and other
> GPU targets).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
address space attribute. Similar to other single-source C++-based GPU
programming modes like OpenMP/CUDA/HIP, SYCL uses
clang's "default" address space for types with no address space attributes.
During the lowering to LLVM IR, the default address space is mapped to
the SPIR generic address space. Declarations are assigned to the
relevant memory region depending on their declaration context and
pointers to them are cast to generic. This design has two important features: keeps
the type system consistent with C++ on one hand and enable tools for emitting device code
aligned with SPIR memory model (and other GPU targets).

```

This is really a suggestion, I tried here to 1) move away from OpenCL (use SPIR instead as this is the target) 2) emphasis that the address space assignment happens during lowering to LLVM IR rather than Sema.

### Address spaces handling

SYCL specification uses C++ classes to represent pointers to disjoint memory
regions on an accelerator to enable compilation with standard C++ toolchain and
SYCL compiler toolchain.

For instance:

``` C++
// check that SYCL mode is ON and we can use non-standard decorations
#if defined(__SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__)
// GPU/accelerator implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {

>   // DecoratedType<T, global>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"

Author: ```suggestion
  // DecoratedType applies corresponding address space attribute to the type T
  // DecoratedType<T, global_space>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"
```

  // See sycl/include/CL/sycl/access/access.hpp for more details
  using pointer_t = typename DecoratedType<T, AS>::type *;
 
  pointer_t m_Pointer;
  public:

>   pointer_t get() { return m_Pointer; }

Reviewer 2: We use decorated pointer with get() method. There is also subscript operator. It  returns reference which can be also decorated. In this case the code like below we will have decorated pointer which might be helpful in some cases:
```
        queue.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler& cgh)
        {
            auto acc = buf.get_access<cl::sycl::access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
            cgh.parallel_for<class test>(cl::sycl::nd_range<1>(N, 16), [=](cl::sycl::nd_item<1> it)
            {
                auto x = &acc[i];
             }
         }
```
C++ preserve decoration during getting pointer from reference. So the only change required is to return decorate reference from subscript operator.

Author: I'm not quite sure what are you proposing here. Do you mean we should add another member with a reference to decorated type? It doesn't seem to expose a new use case for address space attribute. Right?

What might be worth adding is `multi_ptr` subscript operator, which drops AS decoration in DPC++ implementation to demonstrate the case when AS-decorated pointer is casted to undecorated/default pointer.

### Address spaces handling

SYCL 1.2.1 language defines several address spaces where data can reside, the

> same as OpenCL - global, local, private and constant. From the spec: "In OpenCL

Reviewer 3: Is it worth explicitly mentioning that we avoid using `constant` address space in our toolchain? I think it is kind of a design question/decision

Author: Done.

toolchain and SYCL compiler toolchain.

For instance:

``` C++
// check that SYCL mode is ON and we can use non-standard annotations
#if defined(__SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__)
// GPU/accelerator implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {
  // GetAnnotatedPointer<T, global>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"

>   using pointer_t = typename GetAnnotatedPointer<T, AS>::type *;

Reviewer 4: What is `GetAnnotatedPointer`, where is it defined? Maybe give a link?

Author: I'm trying to keep the code example short and I think that particular definition of `GetAnnotatedPointer` is not that important as how it maps it's parameters T and AS to `GetAnnotatedPointer<T, AS>::type` typename. I provided an example of such mapping in the comment above. T is arbitrary type and other AS values and applied similar to `opencl_global` showed in the example.
Do you think it's enough?

Reviewer 4: so the `GetAnnotatedPointer` is an implementation detail, right? Why show it to the user at all then?

Author: This document describes DPC++ internal design details and it's intended for DPC++ developers rather than users, so it should be okay to put an implementation details here. This part was requested during code review in llorg, so that reviewers can better understand how OpenCL address space attributes are used in SYCL context.
I've added a reference to the source code with helper template class (`PtrValueType`) implementation.

Reviewer 4: Maybe I am missing something big, but the code snippet at lines 801-803 doesn't clarify anything to me. Maybe you should add more text about what you are trying to convey.

Author: The intent of this code snippet is to demonstrate how OpenCL address space attributes are supposed to be used by SYCL implementation. I tried to come-up with minimal code snippet to make it easier to read than `multi_ptr` implementation in DPC++.
My thought was that `GetAnnotatedPointer` implementation is not relevant to this intent because the code snippet uses only `GetAnnotatedPointer<T, AS>::type` type. So the important question is "what type is GetAnnotatedPointer<T, AS>::type" and I tried to address this question in the comment. `GetAnnotatedPointer` is a helper class which provides a type alias annotated with OpenCL address space attribute. It's introduced to not duplicate the whole `multi_ptr` class. I hope this clarifies why the example is written this way.

To make it more clear I did following:
1. Created #3173 to give a better name for similar class in DPC++ implementation - `DecoratedType`
2. Used the same name in the example.
3. I also aligned `multi_ptr` class members with DPC++ implementation to make it easier to correlate this example with the implementation, although I avoided this correlation originally to have flexibility in using member names better suited for this example.

Now you should able find complete implementation of this helper class in DPC++ header if needed.

Alternative way to simplify the example is to get rid of `DecoratedType` helper class and provide an example of `multi_ptr` class specialization for one of the `address_space` values, which uses OpenCL address space attribute directly w/o a wrapper class. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: OK this is more clear to me now (not so sure if it is also clear for a new reader).
The `DecoratedType` is only used in the code snippet, but not anywhere else.
Maybe change this brief source code comment to explicitly say that the `DecoratedType` is what the OpenCL-style attribute translates into internally:

// DecoratedType<T, global>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"

Author: I'll add following comment:

```C++
// DecoratedType applies corresponding address space attribute to the type T
```

 
  pointer_t data;
  public:
  pointer_t get_pointer() { return data; }
}
#else
// CPU/host implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {
  T *data; // regular unannotated pointer
  public:
  T *get_pointer() { return data; }
}
#endif
```

> Depending on the compiler mode `multi_ptr` will either annotate internal data

Reviewer 4: Why "multi_ptr" is a good name for a pointer with an address space?

Author: It's how SYCL spec names this class.

Reviewer 4: OK, It's out of scope then to challenge the naming of it. Why do you not have the "decorated" argument?
``` C++
template <typename ElementType, access::address_space Space, access::decorated
DecorateAddress>
class multi_ptr;
```

Author: `multi_ptr` template parameters are defined by the SYCL specification (see section 4.7.7.1 "Multi-pointer class" of SYCL-1.2.1 specification). I'm also not quite sure the idea with adding new template parameter.
Here I'm trying to show how OpenCL attributes are used in SYCL implementation.
This example was requested during https://reviews.llvm.org/D89909 review.

Reviewer 4: The "decorate" is added in SYCL-2020

Author: I'll use "decorate" instead of "annotate" in this document to avoid renaming in the future when SYCL 2020 API is implemented.

with address space attribute or not.

To utilize existing clang's functionality, we re-use following OpenCL address

> space attributes in SYCL mode with modified semantic rules and unmodified parser

Reviewer 4: Can you be more explicit about the "modified semantic rules", i.e. how each of these OpenCL-specific address-spaces are treated in SYCL?

Author: Modifications are described below. I'll try to make it more explicit.

and IR generation components.

``` C++
  __attribute__((opencl_global))
  __attribute__((opencl_local))
  __attribute__((opencl_private))
```

The main difference in Sema component with OpenCL mode is that SYCL mode
(similar to other single-source GPU programming modes like OpenMP/CUDA/HIP)
keeps "default" address space for the declaration without explicit address space
attribute annotations. This keeps the type system for the code shared between
the host and device semantically-equivalent for both compilers: regular C++ host
compiler and SYCL compiler.

> SYCL mode allows conversion from annotated pointer to unannotated pointer to

Reviewer 4: It would be good to explain what this conversion is, and when it is possible.

Author: I clarified that SYCL follows OpenCL semantic of generic address space here.

enable integration of accelerated code with standard C++ code.

> > **NOTE:** casting unannotated pointer to address-space annotated pointer must

Reviewer 4: Why is this casting allowed at all at source level?

Author: To enable efficient memory access. Access via unannotated pointer implies additional jit-time or run-time overhead.

Reviewer 4: I mean if we state that casting (with non-matching AS is UB), then why can't we instead disallow that at all?

Author: We follow OpenCL semantic here (see section 6.5.5 "The generic address space" of OpenCL C v2.0 specificaton) and according to my understanding it's useful for cases when address space is known, although pointers are not annotated.

```c++

void some_user_func(int *p) {
  // p is not explicitly annotated, but user knows function is always called with a private pointer
  // cast to private
  multi_ptr<int, sycl::access::private_space> x(p);
  ...
}
```

Reviewer 4: That's fine for "generic". I was suggesting to explicitly forbid casting from a known AS to another known AS, which is different from the first one, e.g. "private" -> "global". But I understand now that this is not the case you were discussing in your note. BTW, why you removed it in your later revision?

Author: > I was suggesting to explicitly forbid casting from a known AS to another known AS, which is different from the first one, e.g. "private" -> "global".

This cast is explicitly prohibited by OpenCL (section 6.5 "Address Space Qualifiers"):

> A pointer to address space A can only be assigned to a pointer to the same address space A or a
> pointer to the generic address space. Casting a pointer to address space A to a pointer to address
> space B is illegal if A and B are named address spaces and A is not the same as B.

BTW, I noticed that DPC++ doesn't detect this illegal cast in the FE, but fails to convert it to SPIR-V file:
``` C++
#include <CL/sycl.hpp>
using namespace sycl;
SYCL_EXTERNAL private_ptr<float> bar(global_ptr<float> f) {
  return private_ptr<float>{f.get()};
}
```

``` bash
InvalidModule: Invalid SPIR-V module: Casts from private/local/global address space are allowed only to generic
   %1 = addrspacecast float addrspace(1)* %0 to float*
```
I'll file an issue for that.

> BTW, why you removed it in your later revision?

I decided refer to OpenCL semantic instead of trying to describe it in my own words - this seems to be less error-prone approach. :)

Reviewer 4: Sounds good, thanks.

// GPU/accelerator implementation
template <typename T, address_space AS> class multi_ptr {

>   // GetAnnotatedPointer<T, global>::type == "__attribute__((opencl_global)) T"

Reviewer 4: Why is __attribute__ using bold font?

Author: I don't know all the nuts and bolts of GitHub rendering engine for Markdown documents, but I guess double underscores have something to do with this.

Reviewer 4: We'd rather fix this because otherwise it looks like calling it out for something.

Author: Do you have particular suggestion how to do this?

Author: BTW, the bold font is visible only in diff view. There is no bold in rendered view: 
- https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/af73e40f62c9805e99163ae2a6833b92c7b740ff/sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md#address-spaces-handling
- https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.html#lowering-of-lambda-function-objects-and-named-function-objects

with address space attribute or not.

To utilize existing clang's functionality, we re-use following OpenCL address
space attributes in SYCL mode: `__attribute__((opencl_global))`,
`__attribute__((opencl_global_host))`, `__attribute__((opencl_global_device))`,
`__attribute__((opencl_local))`, `__attribute__((opencl_private))` and
`__attribute__((opencl_constant))`.

> 

Reviewer 4: SYCL-2020 defines these:
``` C++
3 enum class address_space : int {
4 global_space,
5 local_space,
6 constant_space, // Deprecated in SYCL 2020
7 private_space,
8 generic_space,
9 };
```
Should we give a mapping of "opencl" attributes to SYCL semantics? Also why not add macros for users to see the more meaningful name (even though that underneath "opencl" attributes are re-used)?

Author: > Should we give a mapping of "opencl" attributes to SYCL semantics? 

Could you clarify what exactly do you mean here? I suppose provided implementation of `multi_ptr` with reference to `DecoratedType` helper class gives that mapping. Do I miss something?

> Also why not add macros for users to see the more meaningful name (even though that underneath "opencl" attributes are re-used)?

SYCL provides explicit pointer aliases (see section 4.7.7.2 of SYCL-1.2.1) for users. Do you think we need additional macros?
Could you provide an example of such macros, please?

Reviewer 4: I mean we should show here in the designed and to the end users too that "opencl_local" translates into SYCL's "address_space::local_space" and so on.

Author: I'll add a table with mapping from address space attribute to SYCL address_space enumeration.

The main address space semantic difference of SYCL mode from OpenCL is that
SYCL doesn't assign OpenCL generic address space to a declaration's type without explicit
address space attribute. Similar to other single-source C++-based GPU
programming modes like OpenMP/CUDA/HIP, SYCL uses
clang's "default" address space for types with no address space attributes.
During the lowering to LLVM IR, the default address space is mapped to
the SPIR generic address space. Declarations are assigned to the
relevant memory region depending on their declaration context and

> pointers to them are cast to generic. This design has two important features: keeps

Reviewer 4: > Declarations are assigned to the
attribute annotations. This keeps the type system for the code shared between	relevant memory region depending on their declaration context and
the host and device semantically-equivalent for both compilers: regular C++ host	pointers to them are cast to generic.

Not quite clear. Maybe give an example?

Author: Here is @Naghasan's comment with the example: https://reviews.llvm.org/D80932#2073542.
Do you suggest adding something similar to this document?

Reviewer 4: Yes, please. I can understand that text with examples much better.

Author: Ok. I'll steal Victor's example from https://reviews.llvm.org/D80932#2073542. @Naghasan, I hope you don't mind.
